My first day in Berlin
left such an impression on me.
I still remember the Christmas lights
and the street decorations.
These first few hours after I arrived
were full of joy.
I never want to forget that day.
- Central Airport -
If we look closely
at the history of this airport,
its creation
actually dates back to 1923.
It was planned
as Berlin's first central airport,
replacing the smaller ones
on the city's outskirts.
But even before its completion,
this airport was too small.
In its first year of service, 1924,
it welcomed 1,700 passengers
throughout the whole year.
Just ten years later
there were 81,000 passengers.
Adolf Hitler proposed a plan
to make it "the world's biggest
and most beautiful airport".
He also saw the construction
of the new airport terminal
as part of the rearmament programme.
The other side of the building
is actually below the ground.
That's where
the air raid shelters used to be.
They were used during World War II
when the city was bombed.
Of course they're out of use today.
And that's how the airport,
after firstly being occupied
by the Soviets,
was then taken over
by the Americans in July 1945.
And they installed their airbase
and continued
with the extension of the airport.
The first important task
was the Berlin Airlift
in the divided city in 1948 and 1949.
Could you please repeat that?
No, first he has to go
to the State Office for Refugees.
Located at ICC Messe/Nord.
Exactly. And once
he's been registered in his shelter
he can request
a certificate of residence.
June -
My name is
Ibrahim Al Hussein.
I was born in Syria.
I am 18 years old.
My room used to be on the second floor.
I used to wake up every day
to Fairuz's songs
and the smell of fresh coffee
made by my mum every morning.
I miss everything there
and always try to remember everything.
My room now,
the way I left it the last time I saw it.
My village was located
in the suburbs of Manbej city,
very close to the border of Turkey,
in the far north of Syria.
My village was like any other village.
Its inhabitants were mostly farmers
and some tradesmen.
The town had 3,000 inhabitants
and everybody knew each other.
Peace be upon you!
For those
who haven't been vaccinated yet,
they can do so at our clinic today.
The medical teams
will be there after 2 p.m.
We are also offering flu vaccinations.
The vaccinations
will take place after 2 p.m.
in Hangar 7 near the entrance.
Thank you.
- Announcement in Russian -
Who was that?
It's an Afghan family.
The father is in Frankfurt
and the mother arrived here yesterday.
Just yesterday?
Yes, with her two kids.
They seem to have some money.
And he keeps calling because
he wants to reunite his family.
But she's in Berlin now.
And he wants her in Frankfurt.
No can do.
Are we going?
The last news I heard about my village
is that it had become a shelter
for displaced people
because of the war.
Is the situation any better?
No, I was just worried.
Every time I called it just wouldn't
connect and the line seemed busy.
I'm following the news, of course.
It might also have
an impact on my status.
- Federal Republic of Germany -
Summers in Syria are generally very hot.
Usually the temperatures range
from between 30 to 40 degrees.
My last summer in Syria
was very different
to all the summers before.
We weren't even able
to visit the Euphrates River
because all the roads
had been sealed off.
Because of all the problems over there.
I actually spent
my whole last summer at home.
July -
- Translator -
Did she already have chickenpox or not?
Do you remember?
I don't know.
Yes, I think so.
With red pimples?
No.
I need your hangar card.
No, I need the one for Samira.
This one says "Samir".
It's hers.
But here it says "Samir".
It's a mistake.
Yes, they make mistakes sometimes.
So she gets a vaccination.
Yes.
Come back in a month
to get a vaccination.
My other concern is
that we still don't have doors.
We can't install doors and you know why.
It's in case there's a fire.
That's why.
And the curtains are all fireproof.
Do you understand?
They call it Brandschutz in German.
Brandschutz means "to protect from fire".
And in case of fire, God forbid,
you can get out easily.
You understand this, right?
Yes. But it's annoying.
Yes. How many people are in the room?
There are five of us.
And you annoy each other when you study?
After a while, yes.
The room is neither
specially for them nor for me.
Sometimes people
don't understand each other's needs.
That's right.
I departed from Spandau...
"Away... from."
... and arrived in Tempelhof.
And it was cold.
What do you need to do first?
Here you have an axe.
And with the axe you cut down a tree.
And then you have...
Wood.
Then you have to cut it
into small pieces.
So that you can make a fire.
For your wife
who can then prepare dinner.
But we don't do that anymore.
Not anymore?
So what do men do nowadays?
Today the man...
... doesn't have to...
... to "cute" a tree.
"Cut" a tree.
Because today we have...
electricity and even gas.
We have...
OK.
We don't need it.
Can I light it up?
No, shame on you.
I'm your guest tonight.
No way, he's not our guest.
But it's my first time.
No dude,
you're the shisha bitch tonight.
You're firing the coal for us.
Blow it up!
I'll put mint in the shisha head.
It'll taste perfect.
Yes, please do.
Take this.
Put it in my mouth?
Want some gum too?
No, thanks.
But it tastes good.
No, really. Thanks.
But it's mint! It's mint!
It will be even more fun.
Enjoy!
Will we have to move out this month?
Well, a friend of mine said no.
Who?
She said we'll all leave Hangar 6 and 7
and move somewhere else.
So where will we move?
Sorry?
Where?
The company Tamaja
has two more shelters ready for us.
I swear to God that this time
we're moving to a sports hall!
A sports hall!
Guys, where do you find a view like that?
Yeah, it's grand.
Really, the best view ever.
Tempelhof?
Man, I wish we had a car
and could drive around Tempelhof park.
Even if they pay me 400 euros,
I won't leave Tempelhof.
Their shitty food is still better
than cooking yourself.
August -
I was living on a big farm in Syria.
On our farm
we had more than 1,000 trees:
apple trees,
olive trees, pistachio trees,
plum trees, pomegranate trees, fig trees
and walnut trees.
Our farm wasn't surrounded
by any other houses.
Our closest neighbour
was about one kilometer away.
I loved the isolation.
I miss the country life a lot.
How did they get over the fence?
They climbed over it.
Security guards!
Pick that up.
Pick it up. Save it!
That showered over my head.
Thank you very much.
Do you know these guys?
No.
Holy shit!
That was nice.
Where did you go?
What?
There's nothing sinister about it.
If they'd caught us
and asked what we were doing:
"I'm still high on drugs.
And weed and things."
You were supposed to down that, mate.
See ya guys.
Take care!
Will we be famous one day?
Will we be famous?
Play the other song.
No.
Come on! Let me do it.
What do you want?
And that's why I put it
on our priority list for today.
I think we should contribute
to the new cleaning policy.
Before you start something new,
make sure everything's in order.
My village was divided by a river,
between south and north.
I lived in the south.
My memories of home
are vanishing more and more.
I only remember them
when I call my friends
or see my family pictures on the phone.
September -
It's getting cold again.
Good evening!
Good evening.
You're about to leave?
Yes!
We just wanted to take a short cut
and were wondering why it's still open.
At least you wondered...
Is it still open?
No, it's closed from 7 p.m.
Generally?
It closes once it gets dark.
That's easy to remember.
Yes.
Have a nice evening!
You just need...
Pardon?
We have to take a right?
No, the door is already closed.
Just continue till Tempelhofer Damm.
OK.
Ciao.
Have a good one!
They were really understanding.
Look! A fox!
When everybody is gone,
the foxes come out.
Looking for food.
Now he's sitting down.
Wait, I'll chase him...
I'll be back soon.
Another one.
There are plenty.
Last year they counted 84.
I got accepted at a school in Spandau.
In Spandau?
There's good infrastructure.
Yes, Spandau is massive.
I wish I could move there.
Today they told me I had to move.
You got rejected?
Where is it?
I don't know.
They told me there were daily meals,
so I asked why I had to leave Tempelhof.
I would just be moving
from one shithole to another.
But they told me they already
printed it out and prepared everything.
So I said, "I'm not moving out."
They can't force you.
I'm not gonna sign anything.
I said I'd prefer
to stay at the airport.
In the end they'll tell us
it wasn't built to live in.
We have no choice.
We've been in this crisis situation
for a year and a half. We're used to it.
I don't think
it's a crisis situation.
But we're used to this place now.
There's a day
that will stick in my mind forever.
Because I'd never experienced
danger like that before.
The hours I spent at sea
were so terrifying.
I recall arriving in complete darkness
on a Greek island at 5 in the morning.
I'll always remember
when the sun finally rose.
We were feeling unbelievably happy.
Finally, the hardest part
of our journey was over.
October -
You should enrol her at a school.
And you should hurry up
and get a place there.
Where is it located?
I'll check for you.
Choose one close by.
We don't have a bus ticket.
Why don't you have a bus ticket?
I don't want to buy one. It's 30 euros.
But the school
can't give you a bus ticket.
How much is it?
It costs 36 euros.
Yes. 36 euros.
Would you prefer to work on the story?
What should I do?
Build sentences and write them down.
If you know how to do that.
You simply have to
tell me what you're seeing here.
There are children.
Yes, how many children?
Three.
Boys or girls?
Boys.
Three boys. What are they doing?
Three boys are playing.
Could you write that down?
If you look at the clothes down here...
... you have to connect the syllables.
The Trou-...
The Trousers.
Connect them with a line.
Just connect them:
Trou-sers. A line.
What are the children doing?
They're playing.
Playing...
Write down "playing".
And what is this called?
A duck.
And this one?
Son.
Son?
This is her son?
Yes, her son. And this one?
The daughter of the duck.
And where do they come from?
They are from...
Where are mother
and daughter duck from?
From her heart?
From where?
Her heart!
No, I mean from which place?
From which city?
Where are you from?
From...
From Syria.
You're from Aleppo, right?
I can't remember.
You were young.
Yes.
I can only remember
my grandmother in the summer.
Are you playing with your friends here?
I don't have any friends.
No?
I had one, but he left.
Where did he go?
He went to a hotel.
And you stayed here in the shelter?
Yes.
He didn't go to a hotel.
He went to the Job Center.
What camp?
The Job Center?
We're talking about Hussein!
And now we're looking for a proper home.
I hope you find something.
And when you came to Tempelhof,
how did you end up in the hangar?
In the hangar?
Yes, how did you get there?
They sent us back.
They sent you back?
They brought us here first,
to the hangar.
Who brought you here?
The sheriff?
The police.
Move up the bed a bit.
Now lie down.
Does he have diarrhoea
or anything like that?
But he only eats what I cook for him.
Even if I buy ready-made food,
he won't eat it.
How long have you been here?
For four months.
I sometimes wish
I could go back to my school days,
because honestly,
they were the best days of my life.
How can I forget
the days I spent at school?
Because they were
the biggest part of my life.
The school I went to
for more than ten years.
And my friends at school
who became like brothers to me.
But now, life has changed.
It's not like that anymore.
Some of us, like myself,
fled from the region.
Some of us stayed there.
And some of us died
because of the war.
November -
We are coming back, oh love
we are coming back
Oh flower of the poor unfortunate ones
We're back, oh love, to the fire of love
We bid farewell to time
It makes us forget
the land of forgetting
We say we're going
To be coming back to the home of love
Without knowing
December -
Afternoon! You have to keep your dog
on a leash on the runways.
I was about to go to the dog zone.
Please keep it on its leash
on the way there.
Good. Thank you.
The holidays in Syria are as important
as Sundays are important in Germany.
I would usually sleep
until at least noon.
And then I would spend
the whole day with my family.
Sometimes I would go
to one of my friend's places.
Or they would come
to visit me at my place.
Then we'd spend
the whole night having fun.
Enjoy the evening.
Merry Christmas!
Same to you.
And how old are you?
22.
I see.
The Afghani guy over there
just got his status!
Which one?
Don't know.
Are you visiting relatives
for New Year's Eve?
Yes, my uncle for 10 days.
I see, for 10 days.
10 Tage.
When they said party,
I thought it would be a big one.
With dancing and everything.
But this is really nothing.
It's for the kids, not us.
Let me see it. Let me see it.
Look, it's the toes.
Yes, let me look at it.
Here?
If this heals, my soul will heal.
Yes.
Germans don't know how to lie.
These two things stick in my mind.
If they owe you a cent
they'll go to the bank
and bring it to you.
And they don't lie.
They just don't know how to lie.
Honestly! I swear to God.
What else do you want?
I couldn't be more thankful.
I feel like I'm
on a different planet here. In heaven.
It's like retiring and finding
everything in front of you.
Abu Khalil, come to Hangar 5,
near the aeroplane.
The fireworks are about to start there.
Bring the others and hurry up.
This is our "Chef" Knut.
This is the boss.
This is our second year in Tempelhof!
January -
Everyone was happy.
Lights and noise everywhere.
The fireworks brought back
memories of war.
The fireworks and war
almost sound identical.
And it reminded me how the violence
had taken away our lives in Syria.
Dear ladies.
Today we're meeting
at 3 p.m. in Hangar VII.
You can have your hair cut
at our salon.
We can take care of your kids
or they can join you for supper.
We're also offering a shuttle
to bring you to Hangar 3 for this.
Thank you.
I have to push this button
and keep it pressed down?
Today is my birthday
and I'm officially 19 years old.
My birthday is on 4 January.
This is my second birthday in Germany.
It was a normal birthday,
without a party.
Because firstly, I'm far away
from my family and my home.
And secondly, because no one here knows
when my birthday is.
Except my close friends.
February -
Look. You're getting an upgrade
to refugee status.
That's very good news.
Yes, that's great.
The Federal Office
for Migration and Refugees
granted you refugee status
instead of "protection".
You've got refugee status
for three and a half years.
It's better than "protection".
By the way, this is the first letter
I've ever got from the Federal Office.
I didn't get any mail from them before.
No letters?
No, so shall I wait
for another letter or...
No, the office doesn't
deal with you besides this.
But the Foreigners' Office does?
Yes.
And they'll give me an appointment?
Yes, because now you're protected.
Did they send you the papers
for your integration classes and school?
Yes, I think so.
But a long time ago.
Hello, Abu Hassan.
Where is my mom?
Please let me talk to her.
No, I need my mom.
I'm only going to tell her.
Dude, come on.
Give me my mom.
I'm fine.
How are you?
Siham, please shut up
so I can talk.
OK, so listen:
I just got the status, thank God!
Refugee status
for three and a half years.
It's refugee status, not "protection"!
And this is...
I mean...
This is the best status I can get.
It's not like "protection" status.
With "protection" status
I could get sent back to Syria.
But refugee status allows me to stay
for three and a half years.
Three and a half years.
Yes. I'll start all the procedures
to get the German ID and passport.
I've waited for so long,
but I got it!
This is the best status I can get really.
What's up?
Hello, Jihad.
Hello.
What's up?
Hello, my dear. Sit.
Then make some space.
Just give me a minute.
Yes, Mom.
Yes.
OK.
Yes, I just told her a minute ago.
Yes, I told her.
Alright. I need to go.
Let's talk later.
Alright. Bye.
Who was that?
My family.
How many minutes do you have left?
Can I smoke?
Of course.
Then let's smoke.
You're sitting on my packet.
No, I have mine.
Are you smoking Marlboro?
No, it's Pueblo.
Is it under the pillow?
No.
It's fine. I brought mine.
Here, take it.
Today I went to
my fingerprint appointment.
They postponed it again.
Again?
But that's not a problem.
Why is it not a problem?
They gave me a small document.
A temporary permit.
And is it "protection" or refugee status?
"Protection".
I just got refugee status
for three and a half years!
Where's the cake?
Later.
I want it right now.
I don't have it yet.
I want the cake right now.
Here in front of the camera.
Come on.
Do you want a kiss or something?
Some German music?
No, Arabic.
Here we go.
I remember how shortly
after my arrival in Tempelhof,
I was told a story about some people
who were shocked when they arrived.
They truly believed they would
be deported to Turkey or Syria.
When they saw the old planes parked
outside for the first time.
I think this is the funniest thing
that happened to us
at Tempelhof Airport.
March -
And is it an old or a new building?
Is it just for students?
Yes, there are just students.
So tomorrow
I'll have to leave Tempelhof.
We've no problem with that, huh? Great!
So tomorrow is my last day.
This means your costs aren't covered?
Yes.
Since yesterday.
Super!
So how long have you been here now?
At the airport?
For one year and three months.
For one year and three months!
I mean if you think about...
Since 4 January 2016.
Crazy!
And the idea was that
you would live here
for six weeks at most.
That's the idea of an emergency shelter.
I don't believe that.
A friend of mine was
at the LAGeSo office yesterday
and they said his costs would be covered
for another six months.
You mean they extended the cover?
Yes, for another six months.
Yes, but the idea of the airport was...
I know, I know...
It's the idea.
But they need more time.
Yes, they need a lot of time.
You'll enrol on an integration course?
Yes.
It takes a long time, no?
600 hours?
Yes, it's 600.
And B1 level language class.
And after that?
I'll do a training course afterwards.
And improve my German to B2 level.
I'd like to train as a car mechanic.
And how about yourself?
What?
If you stay in Germany.
Do you know why
I wanted to come to Germany?
I dreamed of becoming a doctor.
I worked at a hospital in Iraq
and couldn't finish...
But this dream...
You know...
It's complicated.
Some refugees are going to Canada now.
My first day at the airport
was on 4 January 2016.
I remember how we arrived
at Tempelhof on a bus.
It was only then that I actually realised
it used to be an airport.
I was shocked because I knew
I would live there.
Tomorrow will be my first day
living outside of the airport.
April -
130 to 90.
Got it. 130 to 90.
Doctor. And church.
PTS.
Posttraumatic Syndrome.
PTS. He's on medication.
His pulse is 120 beats per minute.
120.
Temperature.
36 degrees.
Scratching?
Allergy.
Yes... 2 months...
Coming back?
Yes.
Peace be upon you!
For those
who haven't been vaccinated yet,
you can get vaccinated at our clinic.
The medical teams
will be here after 2 p.m.
We are also offering flu vaccinations.
Ahmed?
Did you get vaccinated
in the last four weeks?
No.
Good.
Are you allergic to eggs?
No.
Did you ever have problems
after a vaccination?
Do you accept the vaccination?
I accept.
Here you are.
Suzanne.
Hurry up!
And what about you?
Still no interview yet?
You should have an answer by now.
Today, tomorrow
or the day after tomorrow.
God willing.
Yes.
Or maybe next month.
Tomorrow maybe!
And most importantly: a positive answer!
And not: "Goodbye!"
May -
- Bee Garden -
The worst day of my whole life
happened in Syria.
It was the day before I left.
When I didn't know
if I would ever return.
Or if I'd ever be able
to see my family again.
I remember the way
my dear mother looked at me,
always with tears in her eyes.
I tried to comfort her and joke,
but deep inside
I could feel an incredible sadness.
It was a terrible day,
my last day in Syria.
But sometimes I think
I might see my family again.